Encounter Generation ideas:

The goal for this is to generate an encounter for a party that will be fully fleshed out, and give the GM something to work with that will challenge the players without going over the top. 

First, we would define the type of enemy that we are facing. 
	* It may be a group of monsters, or a group of sentient humanoid enemies, in some cases both. 
	* We'll define keywords on the enemies, and only enemies with like keywords will be included in groups, so they make sense. 
	* Each Enemy will have a defined role, such as Leader, Soldier, Specialist, etc. 
	* Each enemy will have a value assigned to it. 
	* The total value of the enemies will be equal to or less than the encounter level, with adjustements for requested difficulty. 
	* Loot will be based on a value of the Encounter level * difficulty modifier. 

For Example, the workflow of generating an orc encounter may look like this:

GM decides to give the party an average encounter. He inputs that there are 4 players, of Average Party level 2. The party score is 4*2=8.

The program should look at the available Orcs, and build based on the following. 

0-1 Leader choice. 
0-8 Warrior Choices.
0-4 Specialist Choices.
0-2 Spellcasters.

Lets say it selects an Orc Pirate Captain as the leader. Hes tough, and accounts for 4 build points. 
Warriors are rank and file, worth 1 build point. 
Specialists pose a bit more of a threat, so they are 2 build points. 
Spellcasters can often be almost as deadly as leader, and are worth 3 points. 

The system would then randomly build the encounter, based on those parameters, to decide the output. It should attempt to get as close to 8 build points as possible, without going over. Each individual Monster would have a BP associated with it, and may use partial numbers, such as 1.2, 2.7, etc. I used nice roung number for examples. 

Possible examples: 

Orc Pirate Lord (4BP)
2 Orc Pirates (warriors) (2BP)
One Orc with a Flamethrower (Specialist) (2BP)

Totaling 8. 

Or, possibly the group is Escorting a spellcaster. 

Orc Shaman (Spellcaster) (3BP)
5 Orc Pirates (Warriors, 1 BP each) (5BP)

Or maybe you just ran into a drunken horde of Orcs. 

8 orc Warriors, 1 BP each, (8BP)

I eventually want to link random name generation , random stat generation within a range, and randomized gear onto these enemies, so that each group you fight seems unique, and any sentient enemy they banter with or Capture has a name and a story. This is tedious work for a GM who knows his minions will likely be slaughtered, but not so with the generator. 